G a p sa n df u t u r ed i r e c t i o n si nr e s e a r c ho nh e a l t he f f e c t so f
air pollution
Ruzmyn Vilcassima,∗ and George D. Thurstonb
aDepartment of Environmental Health Sciences, The University of Alabama at Birmingham, School of Public Health, USA
bDepartments of Medicine and Population Health, New York University School of Medicine, USA
Summary
Despite progress in many countries, air pollution, and especially ﬁne particulate matter air pollution (PM 2.5) remains
a global health threat: over 6 million premature cardiovascular and respiratory deaths/yr. have been attributed to
household and outdoor air pollution. In this viewpoint, we identify present gaps in air pollution monitoring
and regulation, and how they could be strengthened in future mitigation policies to more optimally reduce health
impacts. We conclude that there is a need to move beyond simply regulating PM
2.5 particulate matter mass concentrations at central site stations. A greater emphasis is needed on: new portable and affordable technologies to
measure personal exposures to particle mass; the consideration of a submicron (PM 1) mass air quality standard; and
further evaluations of effects by particle composition and source. We emphasize the need to enable further studies on
exposure–health relationships in underserved populations that are disproportionately impacted by air pollution, but
not suf ﬁciently represented in current studies.
Copyright © 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND
license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
Keywords: Air pollution; Exposure assessment; Health effects; Gaps; Future directions
Introduction
Since the early establishment of air quality regulations
in the United Kingdom in 1956 and the 1970 Clean Air
Act in the United States, followed by similar governmental legislations across Europe and the rest of the
world, air pollution levels have decreased considerably
in most major cities in high-income countries that used
to be primary hubs of industrialization and poor air
quality not so long ago. Six ‘Criteria’ or ‘classical’ air
pollutants were targeted by the United States Environmental Protection Agency (US EPA) and the World
Health Organization (WHO): Ground-level ozone (O
3),
particulate matter (PM), carbon monoxide (CO), lead,
sulfur dioxide (SO 2) and nitrogen dioxide (NO 2). Standards and guidelines were imposed for each pollutant 1,2
initiating mitigatory measures. However, controlling air
pollution has been more challenging globally, and levels
of air pollutants have worsened in most large cities in
low and low-middle income countries,
3 at times leading
to historic air pollution episodes in cities such as New
Delhi, Beijing, and Karachi. 4,5 In addition, as levels have
declined in high income countries, new evidence has
documented severe adverse health effects still occur
even at their now lowered exposure levels. 6,7 Concentrations previously considered ‘healthy’ may now exceed
the newer more stringent guidelines by the WHO, and
frequent short-term excursions are observed even in
usually ‘low-pollution’ cities. Thus, air pollution remains a major global environmental concern impacting
human health, particularly among vulnerable groups
and socioeconomically disadvantaged communities. 8,9
The Lancet Commission ’s 2019 report and the WHO
have estimated that some 6.7 million premature deaths
can be attributed to the combined impact of household
and outdoor air pollution, primarily from increased
mortality from cardiovascular and respiratory diseases.
10
Over the past half century, exposure scientists,
epidemiologists, and researchers of various related disciplines have made signi ﬁcant contributions in developing methods for monitoring and controlling airborne
pollutants and investigating the harmful effects of
exposure to air pollution. However, the chemistry of air
pollutants, their behavior in the atmosphere/environment, and their interactions with biological systems are
complex and, despite major strides in research, many
unknowns persist. In 2010, an international specialty
conference sponsored by the American Association for
Aerosol Research (AAAR) titled “Air Pollution and
Health: Bridging the Gap from Sources to Health Outcomes”
11 identiﬁed key needs to improve our understanding of air pollution related adverse effects: 1) a
greater focus on multipollutant science that includes
studies on mixtures and pollutant sources, 2) a better
understanding of biological mechanism and associations of various health effects with sub-components of
PM (e.g., submicron particles, elemental carbon, trace
*Corresponding author. Department of Environmental Medicine, UAB
School of Public Health, 1665, University Boulevard, Birmingham, AL,
USA.
E-mail address: ruzmyn@uab.edu (R. Vilcassim).
eBioMedicine
2023;93: 104668
Published Online 23 June
2023
https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.ebiom.2023.
104668
www.thelancet.com Vol 93 July, 2023 1
Personal View

elements, and source-speci ﬁc mixtures); 3) a further
understanding of susceptibility of populations -
including the role of genetics/epigenetics, the in ﬂuence
of socioeconomic and other confounding factors, and; 4)
the addition of new technologies, such as ‘microsensors’, hybrid air quality modeling, and remote (e.g.,
satellite) sensing data. 11 While there have been signi ﬁcant improvements in addressing some of these concerns, many gaps identi ﬁed at that time still persist.
Of the various air pollutants, greater importance has
been attributed to the mass concentration of particulate
matter (particularly PM with aerodynamic diameters
smaller than 10 μm and 2.5 μm; PM 10 and PM 2.5), due
to studies showing stronger links between ﬁne PM
concentration and adverse health effects. 12 While, even
to-date, the mass concentration of PM is used as the
standard and main exposure metric in many studies, the
AAAR conference attendees raised concerns that mass
concentration alone does not appear to be a metric
sufﬁcient to fully and effectively evaluate the health effects of PM exposure: the size, source, and composition
of PM and other physical properties also need to be
considered in evaluating health effects. More recently,
Nicolaou and Chekley (2021)
13 discussed de ﬁciencies in
air quality monitoring including, research on the longterm effects of exposure, lack of knowledge in relative
toxicities from different sources and the joint and independent effects of multipollutant exposures, the impacts of ultra ﬁne particulate matter, and importantly,
the need for more effort in research in low-and-middleincome countries (LMICs), where exposures are highest, but data are sparse. In addition, attention has been
drawn to gaps in our understanding of air pollution
control and health, particularly on diseases spread by
airborne pathogens.
14 Thus, most knowledge gaps discussed in the past still persist, although insights into
some have advanced signi ﬁcantly in recent years, such
as studies on epigenetic factors associated with air
pollution exposure,
15,16 as well as analyses of source
mixtures and metals more strongly associated with
health outcomes. 17,18 In addition, improved understanding of the biological mechanisms regarding how
air pollutants affect various organ systems, including
cardiovascular, neurological, developmental, and metabolic systems, provide vital insights for other aspects of
research including identifying susceptibility and
possible treatments. For example, recent research has
pointed to oxidative stress from ﬁne PM containing both
transition metals and acidic sulfates, such as emitted by
fossil fuel combustion, as a likely important health
impact causal pathway.
19
Therefore, despite a long history of air pollution
research, there is still much to learn about the interactions between air pollutants and human health
systems, and the external modifying factors in ﬂuencing
this relationship. New challenges have emerged, in
addition to the pre-existing issues and gaps in
knowledge. In this viewpoint, we identify critical gaps
in air pollution research/knowledge, and discuss future
directions and their potential impact on air pollution
related health risks along the following key themes:
(1) Air pollution monitoring methods and technological
limitations e.g. air pollution source and composition,
number concentration vs. mass concentration, central
vs. personal monitoring; (2) Exposure assessment uncertainties impacting health outcomes assessed and,
(3) Regulatory standards and policies.
Gaps in monitoring methods and technological
limitations
PM mass, size, composition, and source
While the U.S. EPA recognized the key role of ﬁne particulate matter in the health effects of particles when it
changed the U.S. ambient air quality standard from PM10
to PM2.5 in 1997,20 further progress has been lagging in its
regulation to better monitor and focus regulation on those
ﬁne particles that are most toxic, which varies within PM2.5
depending on size, composition, and source. The growing
evidence that the most toxic particles are among the submicron size (e.g., nanoparticles), and from sources emitting the most toxic mix of constituents (e.g. fossil fuel
combustion), is yet to be addressed in regulations, or in
most PM air pollution studies.
21 W h i l es o m eh a v ec a l l e d
for the conduct of site-speci ﬁc epidemiological studies of
PM2.5 health effects in every locality to address the variation in PM 2.5 toxicity per unit mass22, the development and
application of source sector-speci ﬁc and composition-speci ﬁc
health effect estimates (e.g., for those with the highest risk per
μg/m3)w o u l dm o r ee fﬁciently allow the derivation of more
locally appropriate site-speciﬁc health effect coef ﬁcients, based
on local measurements of PM 2.5 source and composition,
sidestepping the need for multiple epidemiological studies in
each locality. Thus, better quantifying source and
composition-based air pollution associated health impacts
needs to begin with more detailed particulate matter
monitoring when evaluating air pollution levels over space
and time.
In most countries and cities, air pollution concentrations are obtained via central ﬁxed reference-grade
ambient monitors. In the U.S., the EPA has established a large network of central ambient monitors,
mainly to measure and meet federal regulatory NAAQ
standards, which are based on either hourly, daily
and/or annual averages of overall mass concentration.
In addition, the U.S. EPA has established a more limited
Chemical Speciation Network (CSN) that are useful in
evaluating variations in PM
2.5 composition, as well as
useful for the estimation of source-speci ﬁc exposure
levels at those sites and at intervening locales using land
use regression methods (e.g., see Rahman and Thurston, 2021). 23 Such data have proved useful in discriminating the varying health effects of different PM 2.5
components, but more such composition-based analyses
Personal View
2 www.thelancet.com Vol 93 July, 2023

of PM 2.5 samples and their health effects at more sites
around the world are needed to enable more locationspeciﬁc health effects estimation, enabling more
health bene ﬁt optimized PM 2.5 mitigation policies. The
expansion and maintenance of a worldwide CSN will be
ﬁnancially and technically challenging, added by the
complexity of chemical compositions of various PM
components. However, the data generated from such
methods are key to connect epidemiologic ﬁndings with
toxicological ﬁndings, as demonstrated in the NPACT
study in the USA. 18,24 The studies conducted under the
NPACT initiative were key in identifying source components of PM which have greater potential to cause
harm, as well as to identify the challenges and complexities that need to be addressed to understand the
mechanisms of individual component toxicities.
Since particulate matter derived from sources most
often associated with the adverse health effects of PM
2.5
(e.g., fossil fuel combustion particles) are found in the submicron part of PM 2.5 mass, we also recommend another,
simpler, approach to focus mitigation on the most toxic
particle sources: switch from monitoring and regulating
PM
2.5 to PM 1 (particles less than 1 μmi na e r o d y n a m i c
diameter) mass. This is consistent with the past progression
in particle mass regulation from Total Suspended Particulate Matter (TSP), to inhalable particulate matter (PM10)t o
ﬁne particulate matter (PM2.5). While this concept has been
in discussion among air pollution scientists in recent years,
perhaps the main challenge for implementation of a PM1
standard was the lack of evidence of associated health beneﬁts in the past. PM1 is not monitored in the U.S. and many
other major cities, limiting the number of studies that
investigate associations between PM
1 levels and health
outcomes. However, in recent years there has been a
growing body of epidemiology results ﬁnding stronger
health associations with PM1 mass than with PM 2.5.F o r
example, Yang et al. (2020) recently found that“Associations
with lower lung function were consistently larger for PM1
than for PM2.5.25 Guo and colleagues (2022) evaluated the
varying associations of the incidence rate of female lung
cancer with PM1,P M2.5,a n dP M10 in 436 Chinese cancer
registries and demonstrated that the association with the
i n c i d e n c er a t eo ff e m a l el u ng cancer was stronger for PM
1
than for PM2.5 or PM10.26 Similarly Hu et al. concluded that
their mortality studies found greater PM1 effects perμg/m3,
and that “To effectively reduce the adverse health effects of
PMs, more attention should be paid to ﬁne and very ﬁne
particles”.27 Clearly, further air pollution monitoring of PM1,
and epidemiological studies comparing PM2.5 vs. PM1 associations with adverse health are needed in order to
conﬁr mt h ec a s ef o rP M1 based air pollution control and
regulations.
Monitoring of personal exposures
While central monitors provide a very useful estimate of
a region’s typical pollution levels, they are of limited use
in providing estimates of personal-level exposures.
• First, the number of residents represented by a
central monitor can vary signi ﬁcantly within a
country and between countries. In Europe and North
America, the estimates are about one monitor per
100,000–600,000 residents, while in contrast, across
sub-Saharan Africa one ground-level monitor represents about 15.9 million residents.
28–30
• Second, central site monitors do not represent concentrations in varying microenvironments and
occupational settings, which may be higher. For
example, it has been found that street level NO
2 exposures in a city can be signi ﬁcantly higher than
measured at a regulation air monitoring site located
just a few stories above.
31
• Third, when the interest is to study the health effects
of smaller targeted populations, including vulnerable
communities that may live in areas that do not have
central monitors, they provide little information on
personal exposure levels in populations that may be
more strongly linked to health outcomes.
However, it is important to note that, despite these
limitations of stationary monitoring, consistent associations have still been found in epidemiological studies
over large populations using central monitoring data in
different geographical regions. More focused exposures
are needed to consider more sensitive subpopulations.
Advanced modeling of higher spatial resolution exposures using central monitor data as inputs have provided more spatially detailed estimates, such as via Land
Use Regression (LUR) models, and satellite estimates of
surface PM concentrations.
23,32 However, LUR and air
quality models require extensive monitoring, meteorological data, and built environment information, 33,34, and
may not be broadly applicable to other locations. Similarly, satellite estimates of PM, while more spatially
comprehensive, may have errors in the range of 22 –85%
if they are not cross-validated by ground level monitoring data, and are also impacted by other atmospheric
conditions and particles in the atmosphere. 28 Due to
such limitations, accurately estimating air pollution exposures for epidemiological studies still remains a
challenge, contributing to variations in the estimations
of health effects per amount of exposure, particularly in
LMICs and rural areas in high-income countries, where
central monitor coverage is more sparse.
This brings us to a more accurate approach for the
estimation of individual level exposures to air pollutantspersonal monitoring. Personal monitor sampling at
breathing level provides the most accurate timeintegrated exposures and variations of an individual ’s
exposure.
35 For example, van Nunen et al. (2021) successfully employed 24-h personal monitoring of PM 2.5,
ultraﬁne particles, and soot concentrations to study their
associations with blood pressure and lung function
changes.36 Xie et al. (2021) simultaneously obtained PM
measurements from personal monitors and regulatory
Personal View
www.thelancet.com Vol 93 July, 2023 3

monitors to study exposures in individuals with asthma,
and demonstrated that the portable monitors were better able to capture personalized air quality information
compared to the traditional method.
37 However, despite
these advantages, the wide use of personal monitors for
exposure studies is limited for several reasons. Personal
monitors and methods that have been validated and are
of research grade have been expensive and require
initial training to use, particularly for monitoring of
gases and volatile organic compounds (VOCs). Examples for PM personal monitoring methods and devices
include gravimetric analysis using portable pumps and
ﬁlters, as well as light scattering-based nephelometric
devices, which can cost in the range of $7000 - $8000
per unit. Therefore, monitoring exposure concentrations of a group/population has been limited by the
number and cost of research-grade personal monitors
available. Thus, although personal monitoring can provide more accurate estimates of individual and sensitive
subpopulation exposures, these limitations have prevented them from signi ﬁcantly advancing the ﬁeld of air
pollution and health studies, as compared to the
contribution from studies that have used central-site
monitoring data.
In recent years, however, the goal of higher spatial
and time resolution individual level air pollution
monitoring has been made more attainable by the
introduction and rapid advancement of low-cost sensors. Low-cost sensors (LCS) are expected to be an
important development in the future direction of more
democratized, high resolution, and inter-connected air
(and health) monitoring, generating ‘big data ’ for complex, but more inclusive, research. In addition to being
inexpensive, mobile, and light weight, currently available LCS are smartphone compatible, which has greatly
increased their appeal among concerned citizens and
environmental non-pro ﬁts, allowing monitoring among
those who could not previously afford the traditionally
more expensive personal monitoring equipment. LCS
are also typically linked via GPS, and are used for
crowdsourcing and identifying air pollution ‘hotspots’ in
cities.
38 Recognizing this, the U.S. EPA has developed a
comprehensive program to test and validate currently
available low-cost air monitoring devices against reference grade and/or more advanced instruments, which is
a major step in testing their capabilities for research.
39,40
A signiﬁcant body of research has now been done to test
and use LCS for personal exposure monitoring,
demonstrating their potential for use in research, with
proper quality control.
38,39,41,42 Importantly, their advantages make low-cost sensors a strong candidate for
studies in LMIC, where resources for environmental
monitoring are more scarce.
Despite the numerous advantages of low-cost air
monitoring sensors, their accuracy may be limited as
measurements can be biased by variations in the
ambient environment, inter-instrument variability,
limitations in the range of concentrations that can be
measured, and concentration plateauing due to
signal saturation above certain levels - typically above
100 μg/m
3.41,43 They have also been found to underperform in lower pollution settings, demonstrating poor
agreement with more advance instruments below 40 μg/
m3.44 Therefore, they are most accurate and have high
agreement with reference instruments only within a
particular range.42,43 Sensor ‘aging’ drift is also a concern.41
In very high concentration situation LCS may also become
saturated, and fail to accurately assess extreme concentrations. Therefore, scientists and the U.S. EPA have recommended periodic calibration of low-cost devices with
more advanced or reference instruments to achieve data
quality and accuracy.
39,43,45,46 In addition, prior to use in
studies, they require continuous development and evaluation of calibration protocols and algorithms, which, if not
done, can lead to uncertaintie s in obtaining reliable and
timely air quality data.
42 Indeed, monitoring data quality
has been found to improve LCS performance signiﬁcantly
after calibration.46 Another challenge in LCSs is the lack of
ap h y s i c a ls i z e‘cut-point’ that are designed into advanced
i n s t r u m e n t s .S e n s o r se s t i m a t ep a r t i c l es i z eu s i n ga ni n -
ternal algorithm, which at times have been found to be
different from reference instruments.
41 However, overall,
LCS present a great potential to be a powerful tool for
augmenting central site air quality monitoring data with
higher resolution, particularly for research in communities
in LMIC and other areas that are unable to afford central
site reference monitors.
Other developments in methods and technologies
for personal monitoring that have seen progress in
recent years and have future potential include, low-cost
wearable sensors to measure health biometrics,
47,48 and
non-invasive health biomarker analysis methods, such
as breath biopsies.
49,50 These methods, combined with
low-cost air monitoring devices, could be used to
generate high resolution exposure-health metrics for
scientists and medical professionals in studying and
mitigating the health impacts of air pollution.
Exposure assessment uncertainties and
exposure misclassi ﬁcation due to movement
between environments with varying
conditions
Advancements in monitoring instrument technologies,
statistical and modeling methods, and high-resolution
geographical mapping have improved our ability to
better estimate exposure concentrations of populations
in regions of interest, such as in communities living
close to a powerplant, or children exposed to vehicle
emissions when they live near highways. Recent
research indicates that epidemiological effect estimates
of PM
2.5 health effects are robust to the choice of PM 2.5
exposure assessment spatial resolution. 51–53 However,
individuals move between ‘microenvironments’ with
Personal View
4 www.thelancet.com Vol 93 July, 2023

varying sources and concentrations, and failing to
incorporate these variations may still lead to exposure
misclassiﬁcation and/or exposure estimation errors.
Exposure estimation errors may be exacerbated among
those living outside an urban core, or when time is
spent in microenvironments with higher than average
air pollution within the urban core.
54 More epidemiological studies that incorporate study participant
mobility into exposure assessments are needed, which
may now be more practical, given the improvements
and cost reductions in personal particulate matter
monitoring equipment, and the common availability of
cell phones for data storage and transmission.
We particularly note two venues of air pollution
related health exposures that impact a large number of
individuals, but have lacked suf ﬁcient attention and
need further exposure - health effects investigations.
They are: (a) when traveling to polluted cities abroad
(particularly international travel) and, (b) when using
major transit systems, especially in underground subway
systems.
Air pollution health risks when travelling
Until the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic,
international tourist arrivals had been steadily
increasing with approximately 1.4 billion worldwide arrivals in 2019.
55,56 After a signi ﬁcant drop in 2020 and
2021, recent estimates show an increasing trend, and
international tourism climbed to nearly 60% of prepandemic levels in January –July 2022.
56 During travel,
a large population of individuals may be exposed to air
pollution concentrations and compositions that signi ﬁcantly vary from their home city/country, especially
when they travel to popular destinations in Asia, Africa
and South America. Megacities in these regions have
poor air quality which are known to exceed local and
WHO guidelines by several levels of magnitude.
4,5,57
However, although billions of individuals travel internationally, there is very limited research addressing the
impact of air pollution on travelers ’ health.
58
Travelers may experience a large differential in
ambient exposure concentrations and composition
within a short time of air travel, increasing their risk of
air pollution related injury compared to residents who
are more likely to be adapted to local conditions and
knowledge. Although limited in number, existing
studies have indicated that exposure to elevated levels of
PM
2.5 in cities abroad can be associated with adverse
cardiopulmonary health impacts, including a reduction
in lung function, increase in respiratory symptoms and,
and impacting quality of life.
58–60 Importantly, most
study participants recovered from symptoms after
returning to home cities. Other studies provide evidence
of systemic pro-oxidative and proin ﬂammatory effects
associated with travel-related exposure to air pollution,
where the elevated levels of biomarkers were interestingly reversed after the participants returned to their
home city.
61 In this study, exposure to Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons (PAHs) in cities traveled to altered
oxidative metabolism, which can be attributable to
ambient air pollution exposure.
In addition to air pollutant exposure related health
risks, travelers may be unpredictably impacted signi ﬁcantly by climate-related events, which are expected to
particularly affect vulnerable urban areas in South Asia,
East Asia and the Paci ﬁc.
62 Rising global temperatures
can increase the frequency of ‘extreme events ’ such as
ﬂoods, heatwaves, dust storms and wild ﬁres, and increases in air or water pollution, thereby elevating health
risks, and causing population displacement in affected
regions. Thus, global warming is expected to contribute
to human mobility, leading to increased migration and
travel to regions that are perceived to be ‘safer’.
63 While
studies on migrant health are emerging, there is a need
for more studies linking previous and ‘new’ exposures
of migrant populations to cardiovascular and respiratory
health outcomes.
58,63
Despite these concerns faced by travelers and migrants, insuf ﬁcient studies have further explored short
and long-term health outcomes associated with visiting
or temporarily migrating to polluted cities for work,
safety, education, leisure etc., especially among vulnerable groups such as older, pregnant, and other susceptible travelers.
58 Adding to the dif ﬁculty of conducting
such studies is the need to adjust for many confounders,
such as stress, temperature changes, changes in diet
and water intake, alterations in sleep and sleep patterns,
effects of changing altitude, and infectious/transmissible diseases. Studies on physiological outcomes
and biomarkers that can detect early cardiovascular effects due to air pollution exposure during international
travel will be important to warn elderly and susceptible
travelers of risks of traveling to polluted destination
cities, prior to travel. Given that cities are increasingly
connected via travel, their residents and visitors present
dynamic interdependent systems in concert with variable air pollution pro ﬁles. Therefore, we suggest that
future epidemiological studies that explore ambient PM
associated all-cause, cardiovascular, and respiratory
mortality not consider populations in individual cities as
a static entity, but also strive to consider travel related
exposures as a potentially signi ﬁcant component of
disease risk when evaluating such outcomes.
64
Air pollution health risks in subways
Underground subway/metro systems move large
numbers of people daily, and further growth in such
systems are expected.
65,66 Although commuters spend a
relatively shorter time on subway platforms, daily exposures to peak levels may signi ﬁcantly impact health.
However, despite several studies documenting very high
levels of PM exposure in underground systems, especially in North America, Europe,
65,67–70 we are unaware of
studies that have yet comprehensively evaluated the
Personal View
www.thelancet.com Vol 93 July, 2023 5

h e a l t hr i s k so fi n h a l a t i o no fh i g hl e v e l so fv a r y i n gc o m -
p o s i t i o n si nt h i su n i q u ee n v i r o n m e n t .S u b w a yP M2.5 levels
have shown to be elevated several fold over ambient levels
even in busy cities, and contain higher proportions of iron
and other metals, such as manganese and chromium.
65,68
High elemental carbon levels have also been reported in
subways that utilize diesel-powered maintenance trains.70
Except for some studies indicating that exposure to subway particles causes inﬂammation in lung epithelial cells
and oxidative stress in exposed workers,
71,72 the health
implications of repeated relatively brief, but very high,
pollution exposure levels in subways are largely unknown.
Further complicating the issue is the ambiguity of classifying the subway environment for regulatory purposes.
Should outdoor ambient standards apply, and if so who
has the authority to regulate pollution levels in subways?
Or is it considered an ‘indoor’ environment? These legal
questions remain unanswered, limiting our ability to
evaluate the possible mitigatory options. Pollution mitigation approaches, such as imp roved ventilation in subway
platforms and cars, and the use of electric/battery powered
maintenance equipment for system maintenance, are
suggested, and may also reduce virus transmission risks at
t h es a m et i m e .
73,74 Further research on subway air quality
is needed, especially as a large population of commuters
around the world is expected to increasingly rely on these
systems in the future.
Regulatory standards and policies impacting
health
The establishment of ambient air quality standards
around the world, particularly in North America and
Europe, has greatly improved air quality in many regions compared to levels before they were established,
and prompted improvements in air monitoring, technological advancements in emissions control technology, and more environmental friendly practices in
industry.
75–77 In the U.S., these gains in air quality
reduction bene ﬁts were made even as the economy has
grown.77 Legislation in Europe led to the rapid growth in
monitoring stations, and progress was made towards
improving air quality over time, despite some challenges
such as rising O
3 levels in many European cities 76 In
recent years, cities such as Beijing, which had extremely
poor air quality in the past, has achieved sizable and
steady declines in ambient air pollution levels due to
stricter control measures on emissions, and particularly
on coal burning.
78 Such signi ﬁcant reductions in PM 2.5
and PM 10 concentrations in 74 key cities in China (between 2013 and 2016) were shown to be associated with
substantial reductions in mortality and years of life
lost.
79 Thus, air quality regulations and action plans have
overall reduced air pollutant levels and improved the
lives of affected populations. However, there is still
much to do on improving standards and policies,
particularly considering the emerging knowledge on the
complexity of particulate air pollutants and recent
studies demonstrating inequalities in air pollution
exposure and health disparities among historically
disadvantaged and vulnerable (due to economic and
environmental disasters) populations.
Recent research indicates that there is no known
threshold of PM and other pollutants ’ health effects
(e.g., see US EPA, 2019
80), while reductions will likely
become more challenging to implement as regulatory
PM
2.5 mass concentration limits decrease. As a result,
the focus on mass without consideration of variations in
composition toxicity has the potential drawback that the
ﬁne mass constituents that contribute the most mass
may become the focus of controls, even if they are not
the most toxic constituents. For example, some have
recently recommended focusing on controlling gaseous
ammonia releases in order to lower PM
2.5 because it
reacts with ambient sulfuric and nitric acid to form
particulate matter, 81 but that step would lead to more
acidic (less neutralized), and likely much more toxic,
particulate matter that remains in the air, likely leading
to increased toxicity per unit mass. 82 Therefore, it would
likely be more health ef ﬁcient to consider focus additional PM regulation on the most toxic constituents of
PM2.5, or on the submicron subcomponent, of the mass
PM1. As discussed above, this concept has been in discussion for many years, 83 but now may well be the time
for its implementation.
The issue of varying PM 2.5 composition and toxicity
also has implications to standard and Air Quality Index
(AQI) interpretation. In contrast to the setting of a single
AQI for individual gaseous pollutants, such as ozone,
which is the same compound everywhere, the setting of a
single world-wide AQI for particulate matter is less
defensible, because PM
2.5 varies widely in its size distribution, composition, and dominant source, and likely in
its toxicity to humans per μg/m3,f r o mp l a c et op l a c e .
Thus, the above discussed need for the assessment of
PM2.5 exposures and health impacts as a function of size,
composition, and source is directly relevant. Such studies
would be useful for the setting of locality-speci ﬁcP M 2.5
AQI values, For example, a re cent study of pollution in
Dhaka, Bangladesh found that the hospital admissions
and mortality impacts of fossil-fuel combustion PM2.5 has
a much larger impact per unit mass than biomass related
PM
2.5 in Dhaka.84 Since biomass burning dominates the
PM2.5 mass in Dhaka, it may be that the overall health
impacts of PM2.5 are less per μg/m3 than in the developed
world cities where the WHO guideline studies were primarily conducted, and so it may well be that a higher AQI
guideline would be appropriate in Bangladesh than in the
US or Europe. Similarly, windblown sand is a large
component of the PM
2.5 i nt h eM i d d l eE a s t ,u n l i k ew h e r e
PM2.5 epidemiological studies have been conducted. Thus,
it stands to reason that PM2.5 AQI adjustments need to be
made, depending on the region and particularly the primary sources of air pollution in that state or nation.
Personal View
6 www.thelancet.com Vol 93 July, 2023

Environmental justice considerations make clear that
the environmental health protection improvements
suggested here for regulations and policies must most
pressingly be applied to address those most affected by
air pollution. Growing evidence has established that the
burden of air pollution is not equally shared, and socioeconomically disadvantaged populations and certain
racial and ethnic groups often face higher exposure to
pollutants and greater responses from air pollution.
8,85–87
Thus, future research, education and air pollution control policies should consider their impact on groups
most affected, and make an effort to mitigate inequities
during the planning and implementation stages. For
example, Wang Y et al. (2022) have shown that national
inequalities in air pollution exposure can be eliminated
with fewer emission reductions if those reductions
target the most heavily burdened locations, rather than
implementing across the board national standards
(Fig. 1 ).
88
The exposome and precision environmental
health in air pollution research
Recent scientiﬁc discussions on the future of the ﬁeld of
environmental health have highlighted the importance
of integrating knowledge from various related disciplines. Focus has been drawn to utilizing ‘exposomics’
which is based on the concept of the ‘exposome’-the
totality of all exposures in an individual ’s life course.
89
Although the exposome is not a new concept, the realization that average exposures alone cannot explain
disease spread or occurrence has highlighted the
importance of considering the variations and complexities of the pollutants, and their interactions with individual and population characteristics over space and
time. Thus, the concept is gaining increasing applications in environmental health and toxicology studies.
Early prediction and avoidance of diseases has gained
greater importance, combined with a push towards
more precise individualized treatments for exposure
associated diseases.
90
Precision environmental health, predictive and
translational toxicology, social justice, and health disparities have been identi ﬁed as key areas for future
development of environmental health, as well as climate
change and innovative computational methods for data
analysis. For example, an expert panel from the National
Academies sponsored by the National Institutes of
Environmental Health Sciences (NIEHS) has identi ﬁed
areas that the biomedical community can use to integrate environmental health science into broader studies
of human health.
91 Such integration of exposure data,
‘omics’ data, and personal health information will
greatly improve our ability to predict air pollution
related diseases (i.e. using predictively toxicology approaches) and implement more targeted early prevention strategies. However, for precision medicine to be
effectively integrated with exposomics and to be utilized
for predicting and preventing air pollution related diseases, the focus has to be expanded from genetic or
molecular studies alone to also incorporate environmental factors that determine disease progression.
Despite the available technologies, researchers have
expressed concern that environmental or exposure
related issues are rarely considered in current precision
medicine programs.
90 Nevertheless, there is huge potential in integrating exposomics and precision medicine methods in future environmental health research,
especially when combined with personal wearable
monitors, advanced analytical methods, and modern
artiﬁcial intelligence capabilities.
Discussion
While acknowledging that the ﬁeld of air pollution and
associated health effects is robust and ever growing, and
that scientists throughout the years have greatly contributed to the understanding and betterment of the science,
we have identi ﬁed key gaps and future directions especially needing attention in current and future studies and
policies (as summarized inTable 1). Future directions will
be in ﬂuenced by technological developments and more
advanced methods of particulate matter air quality
Fig. 1: PM2.5 exposure-disparity and concentration-reduction
curves. Each panel compares three approaches to emission reduction: location (green line), sector (blue line), and NAAQS-like (i.e.,
employing a concentration standard; here, 6 μg/m3; orange line). An
“equal reduction ” approach, where all emissions are reduced proportionately, would be a straight line (black dotted line). The location approach (green line) can eliminate national disparities with
modest total emission reductions. Fig. 1 was obtained from 88 with
permission from the corresponding author.
Personal View
www.thelancet.com Vol 93 July, 2023 7

measurement, modeling, analysis, and regulation, such as
focusing future additional regulation on the most health
threatening particles, such as PM 1. On the other hand,
other air pollutants, such as volatile organic compounds,
nanoparticles, emissions from new technologies and industrial processes, emissions from e-waste disposal and
burning also need attention and further investigation as to
how more efﬁciently to mitigate their risks. Occupational
exposures, medical exposures, and immune responses to
‘new’ and more toxic pollutants are other areas of research
(among many others) that would also warrant attention
and new methodologies for assessment.
Thus, the present and future of environmental health
and air pollution research present many challenges,
such as changing pollution source mixes and characteristics over space and time, but also new opportunities, as technology opens new exposure measurement
possibilities. Strong international cooperation is needed
between countries/communities with resources and
those that do not, for more extensive and advanced
exposure data collection and dissemination, research
knowledge, and resource sharing, so that these new
methods and technologies become accessible in LMICs
and burdened communities, as well. In this way, there is
the potential to achieve a world in which scienti ﬁc
collaborations, using more globally accessible methodssuch as remote and low-cost sensors, open source data
platforms, and capacity building programs, can greatly
inﬂuence and mitigate air pollution related health risks,
enabling better informed, fair, and more equitable
environmental health solutions for all.
Contributors
Both authors (RV and GDT) contributed to the conceptualization,
preparation of the original draft, and editing of the manuscript. Both
authors read and approved the ﬁnal version of this manuscript.
Data sharing statement
Not applicable.
Declaration of interests
The authors declare no completing interests.
Acknowledgements
This work was not funded by any speci ﬁc funding agency. RV is partially
supported by a JPB Environmental Health Fellowship award granted by The
JPB Foundation and administered through the Harvard T.H. Chan School of
Public Health. The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does
not necessarily represent the ofﬁcial views of any funding agency.
References
1 United States Environmental Protection Agency (US-EPA). Criteria
air pollutants. https://www.epa.gov/criteria-air-pollutants#self;
2022. Accessed September 30, 2022.
Gaps/limitations identi ﬁed Current status Suggestions/future directions
Air pollution monitoring
-P M2.5 mass concentration determines
standards.
- Central ﬁxed monitor-based air
pollution estimates.
Current standards are based on only mass concentration, not particle
characteristics.
Air pollution exposure of individuals are calculated/modeled based on
ﬁxed location estimates assuming the population within a particular
radius is exposed to the calculated concentrations; central monitors
are limited and primarily located in urban areas.
Air monitoring coverage in LMICs are needed, but very limited.
Monitoring, policy analysis, and regulation needed by particle
composition. Source-sector speci ﬁc health effect estimates are needed, as
well as submicron, PM1, mass monitoring.
More extensive personal monitoring using low-cost sensors and
methods, use of satellite data in combination with sensors for better
personal estimates, better air pollution exposure models that integrate
data from various sources, improved software and prediction capabilities.
Open source databases of air pollution data, including data on LMICs,
affordable technology, and collaborations between scienti ﬁc resource rich
and resource de ﬁcient countries.
Exposure assessment uncertainties
Examples of interest:
- Exposure during visits to polluted
cities.
- Exposures in underground transit
systems.
Disease risks are often based on exposures estimated from central
monitors, not incorporating variations in microenvironments and
personal exposure variations.
Despite over a billion individuals traveling to international destinations
annually, where air pollution levels vary from their home cities, only
limited research has explored the health implications of exposure to
such varying level and compositions.
Although limited, emerging studies have found very high levels of PM
in underground systems, particularly high levels of metals; and few
studies have explored the health effects/risks.
Personal monitoring with low-cost devices; factoring in study participant
mobility; consider the total exposures (Exposome), and apply data for
precision medicine to identify and mitigate health outcomes.
Further studies and understanding of the physiological changes
associated with exposure to varying air pollution during travel, studies on
travel health - future travel and migration is expected to increase; early
warnings for vulnerable populations.
Studies on the health risks commuters and workers face due to being
exposed to high levels of subway air pollution, which may be high in iron
and black carbon, are warranted.
Regulatory standards and policies
Stringent standards and policies in HICs; resources for research and
policy implementation have yielded signi ﬁcant improvement in HICs.
In-contrast – although exposed to high levels, data, research and
standard implementation is very limited in LMICs; increased risk of air
pollution related cardiovascular mortality.
Current air quality indices (AQIs) are based on considering PM in all
regions as equally toxic, despite research to the contrary.
More interest and resource sharing with LMICs needed, as well with
underrepresented and socioeconomically disadvantaged communities in
HICs; local solutions needed for local problems and increase education
and awareness.
Considering PM composition and source when setting of locally
appropriate AQIs could maximize the health bene ﬁts of pollution
mitigation measures.
HICs, High-Income Countries; LMICs, Low- and Middle-Income Countries; PM, particulate matter; AQIs, Air Quality Indices.
Table 1: Summary of gaps and future directions in air pollution research and mitigation.
Personal View
8 www.thelancet.com Vol 93 July, 2023

2 World Health Organization. What are the WHO Air quality
guidelines?. https://www.who.int/about/contact-us; 2021. Accessed
October 1, 2022.
3 Collaborators GBDRF. Global burden of 87 risk factors in 204 countries and territories, 1990-2019: a systematic analysis for the Global
Burden of Disease Study 2019. Lancet. 2020;396(10258):1223–1249.
4 Marlier ME, Jina AS, Kinney PL, DeFries RS. Extreme air pollution
in global megacities. Curr Clim Change Rep . 2016;2(1):15 –27.
5 Molina LT, Zhu T, Wan W, Gurjar BR. Impacts of megacities on air
quality: challenges and opportunities . Oxford University Press; 2020 .
6 Dominici F, Zanobetti A, Schwartz J, Braun D, Sabath B, Wu X.
Assessing adverse health effects of long-term exposure to low levels
of ambient air pollution: implementation of causal inference
methods. Res Rep Health Eff Inst . 2022;(211):1 –56.
7 Hayes RB, Lim C, Zhang Y, et al. PM2.5 air pollution and causespeciﬁc cardiovascular disease mortality. Int J Epidemiol .
2020;49(1):25–35.
8 Gwynn RC, Thurston GD. The burden of air pollution: impacts
among racial minorities. Environ Health Perspect . 2001;109(Suppl
4):501–506.
9 Hajat A, Hsia C, O ’Neill MS. Socioeconomic disparities and air
pollution exposure: a global review. Curr Environ Health Rep .
2015;2(4):440–450.
10 Fuller R, Landrigan PJ, Balakrishnan K, et al. Pollution and health:
a progress update. Lancet Planet Health . 2022;6(6):e535 –e547.
11 Solomon PA, Costantini M, Grahame TJ, et al. Air pollution and
health: bridging the gap from sources to health outcomes: conference summary. Air Quality Atmos Health . 2012;5(1):9 –62.
12 Ozkaynak H, Thurston GD. Associations between 1980 U.S. mortality rates and alternative measures of airborne particle concentration. Risk Anal . 1987;7(4):449 –461.
13 Nicolaou L, Checkley W. Inequities in air pollution exposure and
gaps in air quality monitoring. J Allergy Clin Immunol .
2021;148(1):64–66
.
14 Ma Q, Qi Y, Shan Q, Liu S, He H. Understanding the knowledge
gaps between air pollution controls and health impacts including
pathogen epidemic. Environ Res . 2020;189:109949 .
15 Mukherjee S, Dasgupta S, Mishra PK, Chaudhury K. Air pollutioninduced epigenetic changes: disease development and a possible
link with hypersensitivity pneumonitis. Environ Sci Pollut Res Int .
2021;28(40):55981–56002.
16 Rider CF, Carlsten C. Air pollution and DNA methylation: effects of
exposure in humans. Clin Epigenet . 2019;11(1):131 .
17 Peng RD, Liu JC, McCormack MC, Mickley LJ, Bell ML. Estimating
the health effects of environmental mixtures using principal stratiﬁcation. Stat Med . 2022;41(10):1815 –1828.
18 Thurston GD, Ito K, Lall R, et al. NPACT study 4. Mortality and longterm exposure to PM2.5 and its components in the American cancer
society’s cancer prevention study II cohort . Boston, MA: Health Effects
Institute; 2013.
19 Korsiak J, Lavigne E, You H, et al. Air pollution and pediatric respiratory hospitalizations: effect modi ﬁcation by particle constituents and oxidative potential. Am J Respir Crit Care Med .
2022;206(11):1370–1378.
20 United States Environmental Protection Agency (US EPA). In: U.S.
Federal Register, Vol. 62, No. 133 . 1997 .
21 Maciejczyk P, Chen L-C, Thurston G. The role of fossil fuel combustion metals in PM2.5 air pollution health associations. Atmosphere. 2021;12(9):1086 .
22 Li X, Jin L, Kan H. Air pollution: a global problem needs local ﬁxes.
Nature. 2019;570(7762):437 –439.
23 Rahman MM, Thurston G. A hybrid satellite and land use regression model of source-speci ﬁc PM2.5 and PM2.5 constituents. Environ Int . 2022;163:107233 .
24 Lippmann M, Chen LC, Gordon T, Ito K, Thurston GD. National
Particle Component Toxicity (NPACT) Initiative: integrated epidemiologic and toxicologic studies of the health effects of particulate
matter components. Res Rep Health Eff Inst . 2013;177:5 –13.
25 Yang M, Guo YM, Bloom MS, et al. Is PM(1) similar to PM(2.5)? A
new insight into the association of PM(1) and PM(2.5) with children’
s lung function. Environ Int . 2020;145:106092 .
26 Guo H, Li X, Wei J, Li W, Wu J, Zhang Y. Smaller particular matter,
larger risk of female lung cancer incidence? Evidence from 436
Chinese counties. BMC Publ Health . 2022;22(1):344 .
27 Hu K, Guo Y, Hu D, et al. Mortality burden attributable to PM(1) in
Zhejiang province, China. Environ Int . 2018;121(Pt 1):515 –522.
28 Alvarado MJ, McVey AE, Hegarty JD, et al. Evaluating the use of
satellite observations to supplement ground-level air quality data in
selected cities in low- and middle-income countries. Atmos Environ.
2019;218:117016.
29 Pinder RW, Klopp JM, Kleiman G, Hagler GSW, Awe Y, Terry S.
Opportunities and challenges for ﬁlling the air quality data gap in
low- and middle-income countries. Atmos Environ . 2019:215 .
30 Martin RV, Brauer M, van Donkelaar A, Shaddick G, Narain U,
Dey S. No one knows which city has the highest concentration of
ﬁne particulate matter. Atmos Environ X . 2019;3:100040 .
31 Restrepo C, Zimmerman R, Thurston G, et al. A comparison of
ground-level air quality data with New York State Department of
Environmental Conservation monitoring stations data in South
Bronx, New York. Atmos Environ . 2004;38(31):5295 –5304.
32 van Donkelaar A, Martin RV, Li C, Burnett RT. Regional estimates
of chemical composition of ﬁne particulate matter using a combined geoscience-statistical method with information from satellites, models, and monitors. Environ Sci Technol . 2019;53(5):
2595–2611.
33 Johnson M, Isakov V, Touma JS, Mukerjee S, Özkaynak H. Evaluation of land-use regression models used to predict air quality
concentrations in an urban area. Atmos Environ . 2010;44(30):
3660–3668.
34 Wu P, Song Y. Land use quantile regression modeling of ﬁne
particulate matter in Australia. Rem Sens . 2022;14(6):1370 .
35 Brauer M, Brumm J, Vedal S, Petkau AJ. Exposure misclassi ﬁcation
and threshold concentrations in time series analyses of air pollution
health effects. Risk Anal . 2002;22(6):1183 –1193.
36 van Nunen E, Hoek G, Tsai M-Y, et al. Short-term personal and
outdoor exposure to ultra ﬁne and ﬁ
ne particulate air pollution in
association with blood pressure and lung function in healthy adults.
Environ Res . 2021;194:110579 .
37 Xie S, Meeker JR, Perez L, et al. Feasibility and acceptability of
monitoring personal air pollution exposure with sensors for asthma
self-management. Asthma Res Pract . 2021;7(1):13 .
38 Lim CC, Kim H, Vilcassim MJR, et al. Mapping urban air quality
using mobile sampling with low-cost sensors and machine learning
in Seoul, South Korea. Environ Int . 2019;131:105022 .
39 Jiao W, Hagler G, Williams R, et al. Community Air Sensor
Network (CAIRSENSE) project: evaluation of low-cost sensor performance in a suburban environment in the southeastern United
States. Atmos Meas Tech . 2016;9(11):5281 –5292.
40 US EPA. Evaluation of emerging air sensor performance. https://
www.epa.gov/air-sensor-toolbox/e valuation-emergi ng-air-sensorperformance ; 2022. Accessed October 1, 2022.
41 Anastasiou E, Vilcassim MJR, Adragna J, et al. Feasibility of
low-cost particle sensor types in long-term indoor air pollution
health studies after repeated calibration, 2019-2021. Sci Rep .
2022;12(1):14571.
42 Liang L. Calibrating low-cost sensors for ambient air monitoring: techniques, trends, and challenges. Environ Res .
2021;197:111163 .
43 Giordano MR, Malings C, Pandis SN, et al. From low-cost sensors
to high-quality data: a summary of challenges and best practices for
effectively calibrating low-cost particulate matter mass sensors.
J Aerosol Sci . 2021;158:105833 .
44 Johnson KK, Bergin MH, Russell AG, Hagler GSW. Field test of
several low-cost particulate matter sensors in high and low concentration urban environments. Aerosol Air Qual Res .
2018;18(3):565–578.
45 Kim J, Shusterman AA, Lieschke KJ, Newman C, Cohen RC. The
BErkeley Atmospheric CO
2 Observation Network: ﬁeld calibration
and evaluation of low-cost air quality sensors. Atmos Meas Tech .
2018;11(4):1937–1946.
46 Williams R, Duvall R, Kilaru V, et al. Deliberating performance
targets workshop: potential paths for emerging PM2.5 and O3 air
sensor progress. Atmos Environ X . 2019;2:100031 .
47 Blasco J, Peris-Lopez P. On the feasibility of low-cost
wearable sensors for multi-modal biometric veri ﬁcation. Sensors.
2018;18(9).
48 Ometov A, Shubina V, Klus L, et al. A survey on wearable technology: history, state-of-the-art and current challenges. Comput
Network. 2021;193:108074 .
49 Antoniou SX, Gaude E, Ruparel M, et al. The potential of breath
analysis to improve outcome for patients with lung cancer. J Breath
Res. 2019;13(3):034002 .
50 Azim A, Rezwan FI, Barber C, et al. Measurement of exhaled volatile organic compounds as a biomarker for personalised medicine:
assessment of short-term repeatability in severe asthma. J Personalized Med . 2022;12(10):1635 .
Personal View
www.thelancet.com Vol 93 July, 2023 9

51 Crouse DL, Erickson AC, Christidis T, et al. Evaluating the sensitivity of PM2.5-mortality associations to the spatial and temporal
scale of exposure assessment. Epidemiology. 2020;31(2):168 –176.
52 Richmond-Bryant J, Long TC. In ﬂuence of exposure measurement
errors on results from epidemiologic studies of different designs.
J Expo Sci Environ Epidemiol . 2020;30(3):420 –429.
53 Wei Y, Qiu X, Yazdi MD, et al. The impact of exposure measurement error on the estimated concentration-response relationship
between long-term exposure to PM2.5 and mortality. Environ
Health Perspect . 2022;130(7):77006 .
54 Tayarani M, Rowangould G. Estimating exposure to ﬁne particulate
matter emissions from vehicle traf ﬁc: exposure misclassi ﬁcation
and daily activity patterns in a large, sprawling region. Environ Res .
2020;182:108999.
55 UN World Tourism Organization. UNWTO tourism highlights 2017
edition. World Tourism Organization; 2017 .
56 UN World Tourism Organization (UNWTO). UNWTO world
tourism barometer and statistical annex, September 2022 . UNWTO
World Tourism Barometer (English version). 2022, 20(5): 1-40 .
57 Cheng Z, Luo L, Wang S, et al. Status and characteristics of
ambient PM2.5 pollution in global megacities. Environ Int .
2016;89–90:212–221.
58 Vilcassim MJR, Callahan AE, Zierold KM. Travelling to polluted
cities: a systematic review on the harm of air pollution on international travellers ’ health. J Trav Med . 2021;28(4) .
59 Vilcassim MJR, Gordon T, Sanford CA. Does air pollution
contribute to travelers ’ illness and deaths?-evidence from a case
report and need for further studies. J Trav Med . 2018;25(1) .
60 Vilcassim MJR, Thurston GD, Chen LC, et al. Exposure to air
pollution is associated with adverse cardiopulmonary health effects
in international travellers. J Trav Med . 2019;26(5) .
61 Lin Y, Qiu X, Yu N, Yang Q, Araujo JA, Zhu Y. Urinary metabolites
of polycyclic aromatic Hydrocarbons and the association with lipid
peroxidation: a biomarker-based study between los angeles and
beijing. Environ Sci Technol . 2016;50(7):3738 –3745.
62 Schwerdtle PN, Bowen K, McMichael C, Sauerborn R. Human
mobility and health in a warming world.
J Trav Med . 2019;26(1) .
63 Semenza JC, Ebi KL. Climate change impact on migration, travel,
travel destinations and the tourism industry. JT r a vM e d. 2019;26(5).
64 Vilcassim MJR, Freedman DO, Wilder-Smith A. Ambient air
pollution and mortality in 652 cities. N Engl J Med .
2019;381(21):2073–2074.
65 Luglio DG, Katsigeorgis M, Hess J, et al. PM2.5 concentration and
composition in subway systems in the northeastern United States.
Environ Health Perspect . 2021;129(2):27001 .
66 UITP (Union Internationale des Transports Publics). Statistics brief:
world metro ﬁgures 2018 . Brussels, Belgium: UITP; 2018 .
67 Chillrud SN, Epstein D, Ross JM, et al. Elevated airborne exposures
of teenagers to manganese, chromium, and iron from steel dust
and New York City ’s subway system. Environ Sci Technol .
2004;38(3):732–737.
68 Chillrud SN, Grass D, Ross JM, et al. Steel dust in the New York
City subway system as a source of manganese, chromium, and iron
exposures for transit workers. J Urban Health . 2005;82(1):33 –42.
69 Smith JD, Barratt BM, Fuller GW, et al. PM2.5 on the london
underground. Environ Int . 2020;134:105188 .
70 Vilcassim MJ, Thurston GD, Peltier RE, Gordon T. Black carbon
and particulate matter (PM2.5) concentrations in New York City ’s
subway stations. Environ Sci Technol . 2014;48(24):14738 –14745.
71 Karlsson HL, Nilsson L, Moller L. Subway particles are more genotoxic than street particles and induce oxidative stress in cultured
human lung cells. Chem Res Toxicol . 2005;18(1):19 –23.
72 Olivero-Verbel R, Moreno T, Fernandez-Arribas J, et al. Organophosphate esters in airborne particles from subway stations. Sci
Total Environ . 2021;769:145105 .
73 Ren C, Chen H, Wang J, Feng Z, Cao SJ. Ventilation impacts on
infection risk mitigation, improvement of environmental quality
and energy efﬁciency for subway carriages. Build Environ. 2022;222:
109358.
74 Shinohara N, Sakaguchi J, Kim H, et al. Survey of air exchange
rates and evaluation of airborne infection risk of COVID-19 on
commuter trains. Environ Int . 2021;157:106774
.
75 Lu X, Zhang S, Xing J, et al. Progress of air pollution control in
China and its challenges and opportunities in the ecological civilization era. Engineering. 2020;6(12):1423 –1431.
76 Sicard P, Agathokleous E, De Marco A, Paoletti E, Calatayud V.
Urban population exposure to air pollution in Europe over the last
decades. Environ Sci Eur . 2021;33(1):28 .
77 US EPA. The beneﬁts and costs of the clean air Act from 1990 to 2020 .
US Environmental Protection Agency, Of ﬁce of Air and Radiation;
2011.
78 Han J, Meng C, Liu J, et al. The impacts of continuous improvements in air quality on mortality in Beijing: a longitudinal
comparative study. Chemosphere. 2022;291:132893 .
79 Huang J, Pan X, Guo X, Li G. Health impact of China ’s Air
Pollution Prevention and Control Action Plan: an analysis of national air quality monitoring and mortality data. Lancet Planet
Health. 2018;2(7):e313 –e323.
80 U.S. EPA. Integrated science assessment (ISA) for particulate matter
(ﬁnal report, Dec 2019) . Washington, DC: U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency; 2019. EPA/600/R-19/188, 2019 .
81 Gu B, Zhang L, Van Dingenen R, et al. Abating ammonia is more
cost-effective than nitrogen oxides for mitigating PM(2.5) air
pollution. Science. 2021;374(6568):758 –762.
82 Thurston GD, Chen LC, Campen M. Particle toxicity ’s role in air
pollution. Science. 2022;375(6580):506 .
83 Thurston G, Balmes J. We need to "think different" about particulate matter. Am J Respir Crit Care Med . 2017;196(1):6 –7.
84 Rahman MM, Begum BA, Hopke PK, Nahar K, Newman J,
Thurston GD. Cardiovascular morbidity and mortality associations
with biomass- and fossil-fuel-combustion ﬁne-particulate-matter exposures in Dhaka, Bangladesh.Int J Epidemiol. 2021;50(4):1172–1183.
85 Chambliss SE, Pinon CPR, Messier KP, et al. Local- and regional-scale
racial and ethnic disparities in air pollution determined by long-term
mobile monitoring. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A . 2021;118(37).
86 Tessum CW, Paolella DA, Chambliss SE, Apte JS, Hill JD,
Marshall JD. PM(2.5) polluters disproportionately and systemically
affect people of color in the United States. Sci Adv . 2021;7(18) .
87 Collins TW, Grineski SE. Racial/ethnic disparities in short-term
PM2.5 air pollution exposures in the United States. Environ
Health Perspect . 2022;130(8):87701 .
88 Wang Y, Apte JS, Hill JD, et al. Location-speci ﬁc strategies for
eliminating US national racial-ethnic PM 2.5 exposure inequality.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A . 2022;119(44):e2205548119 .
89 Wild CP. Complementing the genome with an "exposome": the
outstanding challenge of environmental exposure measurement in
molecular epidemiology. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev .
2005;14(8):1847–1850.
90 Zhang P, Carlsten C, Chaleckis R, et al. De ﬁning the scope of
exposome studies and research needs from a multidisciplinary
perspective. Environ Sci Technol Lett . 2021;8(10):839 –852.
91 Harker J. Future research priorities: precision health and predictive
tox. https://factor.niehs.nih.gov/2022/6/feature/2-feature-future-ofenvironmental-health-sciences; 2022. Accessed October 28, 2022.
Personal View
10 www.thelancet.com Vol 93 July, 2023